#### Sat Feb 22 15:12:15 CET 2020

I was finally done with the research for spatial partitioning and decided to share it on [rouglikedev reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/roguelikedev/comments/f4ouh5/infinite_game_worlds_and_spatial_data_structures/). It got quite popular and sparked some interesting conversations. Anyway I'm a little tired with this subject for the moment and the article was finally done.

I started thinking about new project. And decided to come back to my genetic algorithm week planner. I was maintaining that project for more or less half year without developing any new features. Just cleaning up the code and updating the dependencies from time to time. Today I spent a moment adding a click debug feature displaying information about each clicked individual on the graph. And that lead me to a small breakthrough. The algorithm wasn't performing well because it was selecting random individuals for breeding. My fitness sorting function was incorrect. Fixing the sorting fixed the selection which in turn fixed the breeding and suddenly everything fell into place. Now it's performing quite well. It is still stuck in local maximum after few generations but it is now very close to solving the weekly schedule. I am happy with this. My next step is to start plotting different variables like total generation fitness over time and maybe some other things that would give me more insight and help debug why it's stuck in the local maximum.

Oh I also made the smallest but coolest quality of life improvement to my bash setup.

```
function tree() {
  find ${@-./*} | sed -E 's:[^/]+/: :g'
}
```

This is my home brew replacement for the popular `tree` cli tool. I'm working on mac so I don't have it available to me out of the box and I really hate the idea of installing third party tool if I can use the tools available to me already to solve the problem. 

Together with the `scout` (tool giving a birds eye overview of the biggest directories I made few months earlier) and all of POSIX (mostly `find` and `grep`) they make great tools at exploring new code bases and directories.

```
function scout() {
  for F in ${@-./*}; do echo "$(find $F | wc -l) $F"; done | sort -r
}
```

Ugh, I see need to fix my blog markdown parser so it doesn't mess with code blocks or inside html tags.
