#### Tue Mar  3 21:42:30 CET 2020

I've been spending some time exploring OpenBSD, pretty cool stuff. I am thinking about migrating to OpenBSD full time. I think I'm naturally aligned with the philosophy behind it. From my experience a well fit symbiosis like this brings unexpected desirable results. Things just click together in places one wouldn't expect.

I've been also migrating from Vim to Vi. I had a brief episode with Ed but quickly discovered I do need a little more then that (auto indentation was the thing that pushed me over the edge). So now I'm on Ex and the Vi. I first started with Ex-Vi (the traditional ex and vi) but today I moved on to the little cleaned up and just a bit bigger Nvi. Nvi is fully "bug-to-bug" compatible with ex-vi, but has got few extra features. It's also the default version of vi on BSD systems including OpenBSD.

Lastly I made more progress with my genetic algorithm. I further improved the graph visualization. First of all I ordered each individual in a generation from highest to lowest fitness. When the graph displays all generations it's now easily visible how one outstanding individual in generation X breeds into 90% of the population X+3. This help me understand _why_ is my algorithm not finishing. I believe that my populations become to monotonous, having mostly identical DNA. I am thinking now about improving the breeding processes from random to a weighted random. Individuals will prefer other individuals with fitness's that complement theirs as breeding partners. This is pretty exciting, it may be the solution! And I haven't even got to counting schemata. I think if I'm lucky enough I may not have to implement counting schemata for breeding preference, very simple difference in finesses may be enough!
