### Sat 13 Jun 23:59:45 CEST 2020

Removing /regex is more difficult then I hoped. The autoconf script has --disable-re flag which basically makes the build ignore all code in /regex and link to system's regex.h instead which is great. However after it builds without too much complaining (single use of one non-standard flag REG_NOSPEC) the resulting binary behaves strange. Ctrl+a command results in "RE error: Invalid character class name". 

But that's not all, the biggest problem is when I use another autoconf script flag --enable-widechar. When I don't use that option I can't type in polish characters example for "polish a": "ą". And if I do use --enable-widechar I can type "polish a" normally "ą", but the / search feature yields random results it matches arbitrary places in the file.

I don't exactly understand why the regex library bundled with nvi source works properly and the gnu regex library does not. From what I found out both POSIX's and GNU clib's regcomp() don't support wide character strings. I couldn't find any information on BSD's regcomp(). Does it support widechars? If it doesn't what makes it work properly while gnu's doesn't?

I don't really know what I am talking about or how characters are really actually handled in C. I know that standard ASCII and POSIX characters are 8 bit (actually 7 bit, last bit is not used) and therefor can encode English alphanumerics and few extra symbols. UTF8 is what's called "variable length encoding" which means that most common characters are encoded in 1 byte like ASCII less common characters in 2 bytes and so on up to 4 bytes. There are also "widechar" strings in C which seems to be a different name for UTF16 which is kind of like UTF8, also "variable length" however it consists of one or two 16 bit codes (as opposed to UTF8's one up to four 8 bit codes). 
