### Fri 21 Aug 15:16:08 CEST 2020

First of all I just discovered that my blog is capable of producing "\&", I just need to add a backslash for escape. I must have foreseen this problem and implemented the escape sequence preemptively and had forgotten about it. It's a great feeling when you can thank your past self for being nice to you. ;)

I might change this behavior though, \& is a common character in normal text. I should probably choose something more obscure for the template variable syntax instead, I won't use those things as much as \& in normal text.

Anyhow,

recently I have been "relearning" C. I am making my way through the [K\&R](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_C_Programming_Language). I'm currently close the end of the second chapter. I've been also using the [##c homepage](http://www.iso-9899.info/wiki/Main_Page), it's a great collection of resources! 

This has been a extremely educative experience so far. Going slowly and methodically through all the boring details and drilling down on them let me discover new things I had no idea about.

1. Getting familiar with the standard library
2. Endianness
3. Integer numbers memory representation
4. Floating point numbers memory representation

I'll write few short notes about each.

#### Getting familiar with the standard library

* man stdio.h - ... or any other of the files for extra details
* stdio.h - standard input/output: printf, getchar, fgets
* limits.h - interesting constants including INT_MIN, UINT_MAX
* strings.h - strlen and others
* math.h - pow and others, interestingly no int arguments, mostly floats and doubles
* stdlib.h - atoi converts string to integer 

#### Endianness

On Linux I can check the "endianness" or "the byte order" using `lscpu` in the terminal. Most systems use "Little Endian" which means that bytes are stored in reversed order. Literally the "most significant byte" is the last byte in the "word". Weird, I don't know why they did it. Here is a quote from Wikipedia page about endianess:

Computer memory consists of a sequence of storage cells (smallest addressable units), most commonly called bytes. Each byte is identified and accessed in hardware and software by its memory address. If the total number of bytes in memory is n, then addresses are enumerated from 0 to n − 1. Computer programs often use data structures of fields that may consist of more data than is stored in one byte. For the purpose of this article where its use as an operand of an instruction is relevant, a "field" consists of a consecutive sequence of bytes and represents a simple data value which – at least potentially – can be manipulated by one hardware instruction. The address of such a field is mostly the address of its first byte. In addition to that, it has to be of numeric type in some positional number system (mostly base 10 or base 2 – or base 256 in case of 8-bit bytes). In such a number system the "value" of a digit is determined not only by its value as a single digit, but also by the position it holds in the complete number, its "significance". These positions can be mapped to memory mainly in two ways:

* decreasing numeric significance with increasing memory addresses (or increasing time), known as big-endian and
* increasing numeric significance with increasing memory addresses (or increasing time), known as little-endian.[note 3]

#### Integer numbers memory representation

Apparently most CPU architectures don't represent signed integers with just a "sign bit + normal integer in binary". They use a thing called ["the two's complement"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two%27s_complement). It's one of the three options provided by the [official C standard](https://web.archive.org/web/20181230041359if_/http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/abq/c17_updated_proposed_fdis.pdf): sigh/magnitude, one's complement, two's complement, and the last one is the most popular because it has some benefits comparing to the others. One of such benefits is that it is impossible to represent a negative 0, there is only a positive zero.

As a heuristic we can imagine that signed integer two's complement implementation represented on a axis will look like this 0,1,...,126,127,-128,-127,-126,...,-2,-1. So with all bits set to 0 we get 0, we all bits set to 1 we get -1, with the first half of bits set to 1 we get 127. And when the next bit is set to 1 the next number after 127 will be -128. It's a gotcha you need to keep in mind when manipulating integer bits manually.

#### Floating point numbers memory representation

Floats can represent extremely big or small numbers if you don't care about 100% accuracy. However they can't represent both at the same time. You can't have extremely large number with an extremely small fraction.

Floating points have very interesting implementation. I'm sure I could read all about the details in the [official C standard](https://web.archive.org/web/20181230041359if_/http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/abq/c17_updated_proposed_fdis.pdf) but I don't need to know everything right away. 

The [Float Toy](https://evanw.github.io/float-toy/) helped me visualize and understand the architecture of floats. For now the following limited understanding should suffice.

Floats are represented in memory as a string of 32 or 64 bits composed of three memory segments: the signed/unsigned bit, the "exponent" (24 bits) and the "significand" (7 bits).

* The signed/unsigned bit represents if the whole value is negative or positive
* The "exponent" is essentially functioning as a scaling factor. It's a signed integer that will be used as power of 2. So 2^n. 2 is sometimes called the "radix" and it usually has the value of 2. It looks like the exponent is using the same scheme ("the two's complement") used to represent integers.
* The "significand" or significant digits, is a smaller unsigned value representing the "core" value that will be scaled by the exponents. From what I can see max value with all bits set to 1 represents 9.9999999, smallest possible values with all bits set to 0 represents 0 and each bit from left to right divides the number in half thus 10000000000000000000000 represents 0.5, 01000000000000000000000 represents 0.25 and so forth and 11000000000000000000000 is 0.5 + 0.25 = 0.75. Pretty neat.
* It also looks like if any bit of "exponent" is set then the "significant value" is 1 + the fraction.

Together "signed, significand * 2^exponent" can represent a great range of numbers and and naturally the bigger the number the less "resolution" can be represented - hence floating point. It's a very clever design.

It looks like x,y coordinates in 32 bit floats are not capable of representing the surface of the entire earth in meters. At the very end the values jump for 2 meters. Now, 64 bit floats are more then enough to have every micrometer of plant earth.
