### Fri  9 Oct 08:40:17 CEST 2020

First to get it off my mind: I discovered another bug in VIP. I'm not exactly
sure when it happens but it seems to happen if I use \$ in substitution command
like so :s/$/./ on any line. Hopefully I can get it fixed today.

Now, for the main course. I have been considering going offline, or rather
fantasising about going offline for years now. The constant noise and addictive
nature of social media, especially youtube.com and 9gag.com in my case make it
almost impossible to be bored. I strongly belive being bored at least a bit is
healthy. It creates space for you to think, helps with the feeling of being 
under constant pressure and the "racing mind" syndrome. It forces you to plan
just a bit which in turn teaches you to not just react immidiatly on your
impulses. I knew about some of those effects before trying to go offline. After
two days of limiting my access to internet I learned some of those other effects
and ecstatic!

I was chatting on IRC about the golden era of computing the 70s and 80s and
about how many things I hold dear were discovered at that time. Most defining
computer science ideas, my faviour game of all time Dungeons \& Dragons. There
was no easy access to internet and people were reading magazines. Kids were
typing in code for the games from magazine into to Commodore 64 (or ZX Sepctrum 
in Europe). That just sounds amazing to me. People who experienced that are 
often saying that now is better and they would trade basic and magazine games for 
google any day. They keep saying how information was scerce and in retrospective 
it was a dark era. I think it's easy for them to say, they were brought up in 
that era, they did not have a chance to build bad habits about constant access to 
information.

Anyway, the subject moved on and I explained that I feel addicted to internet 
and don't have enough self discipline to turn it off. One person suggested I 
should just block the websites I don't like.  It's an amzing idea. Why did I not
think about that before? I was only thinking about absolutely cutting off access 
to all of the internet, but in reality most of my time is spent on just a handful 
of website, and really non https internet usage is negligible, virtually 
nonexistant. So this idea is great. I decided to implement it right away. That 
was two days ago.

I experimented with blocking urls on my ISP's router but it seems to not work 
for some websites. One thing that came in useful from the router settings is 
that I limited time when my laptop has access to internet. I set it to 09-17 
every day. This has already shown an amazing break in habit. For the particular 
websites I first tried adding those domains to /etc/hosts however I quickly 
realised some websites have multiple top level domains like .com .co.uk .nl 
etc., especially google.com which I decided to block as well. Yes it seems to 
shock some people but I decided to kill completly access to google.com bing.com 
and duckduckgo.com. I am now using as my main and only search wikipedia. Yes 
you are reading it right, wikipedia. And for programming questions I use 
stackexchange.com. It takes a bit of adjustment, but really not as much as you 
would think. It also breaks another bad habit and forces me to read more 
offical documentations. To implement this revolutionary idea I reached out for 
help on IRC and few moments later started my journy on writing my first my 
first NSS module. I present to you 
[Rehosts](https://github.com/pyzozord/rehosts). It's like /etc/hosts file but
allows for regular expressions. This is amazing, I have no idea why none else 
did it before. I remember multiple times I wished I could use regexp in 
/etc/hosts.

This post turned out way bigger then I expected so I'll have to write another
one with the technical explanation of how does that NSS module work. This is
actually first time for me writing an extension to an operating system, and I'm
really proud of myself.
