### Sat 31 Oct 09:08:32 CET 2020

#### The Passionate Programmer by Chad Fowler (ISBN 1-934356-34-4).

To be completely honest, I have mixed feelings about this book. I don't necessarily agree with some of the opinions and perspectives expressed in this book, however I do recognize that all of the advises given will be effective if one's goal is to keep current job or get promoted. On the other hand I subscribe under some other opinions with both hands and a leg.

It's a light book and can be read in just a few evenings. It has some interesting stories and good advises but I felt like a lot of the material is obvious. It seems like there are two distinct target audiences for this book: people who are afraid to lose their current job, and people who want to be the best professional; and perhaps some gradient in between. I fall more into the second category, and that is why I original picked up this book. Nonetheless some advises were really good, some helped me organize my preexisting thoughts on the subject and some were fresh and expanded my perspective.

I'll ignore the parts I didn't agree with, or felt uncomfortable with. They had more to do with the goal behind the actions, the motivation, rather then the actions themselves which I found to be sound advises given the assumption for reader's goal was accurate.

I'll write down below my notes and TLDRs to solidify the fresh knowledge and as a future reference if I ever need to remind myself some of those points.

Part 1: "Lead or Bleed?"

*  "Supply and Demand". Be aware of what skills are or will be in high and low demand and high and low supply. Take advantage of market imbalances. Old technologies, new technologies, don't just follow what is popular do the research about the market.
*  "Coding Don't cut it Anymore" - You are not just a coder. You were hired to generate capital for the business, make it so. Understand business. Talk to the business in business language. Do everything you can to help the business.
*  "Be the Worst". You level up to your environment (up or down). Talented people will make you better at your job just by proximity and the level of the conversation. And vice versa, you'll lose some skill if you get used to a lower level.
*  "Invest in Your Intelligence". Recognize your knowledge gaps and other blind spots, and actively work to improve in those areas. Choose technologies from opposite camps and learn them.
*  "Don't Listen to Your Parents". Take risks, be conscious of your decisions and what possible fears have driven them, and what would be the decision if fear wasn't a factor.
*  "Be a Generalist". Understand a bit of all technologies and the full stack; (also business subjects). Be able to solve problems in multiple connected fields and in between them. Problems are often "between" fields. Be the "problem solver" of your team/company especially for problems other people can't solve. Make your self useful any way you can, don't be "just" a [job description]. Your skills should transcend technology platforms.
* "Be a Specialist". Specializing in something doesn't mean not knowing about other things. Do you know how to crash your language's vm? What if specialist surgeon didn't know why the machine over there started beeping? Specialists have deep knowledge and experience. Understand deeply everything that involves your technology (like vm, os, etc). Start teaching those aspects of technology. Being a mentor is one of the best ways to learn.
* "Don't Put All Your Eggs in Someone Else's Basket".  Don't be a Java(Script) specialist, a Microsoft Word designer. Technologies and companies go obsolete. Your career is your Business. Vendor-centric views are myopic. Try doing stuff in competing technologies.
* "Love It or Leave It". Seriously. You can fake it for a while but a lack of passion will catch up with you. Monitor how passionate you are, write a log.

Part 2: "Investing in Your Product"

* "Learn to Fish". Don't be at the mercy of other people, learn it for yourself, be self sufficient. Do you understand everything that is being done for you by tools, generators, applications and other people? Dig deep - "why and how does this work", stop only when you don't know how to dig deeper. Pick most neglected tools or skills you use and drill on them (git, bash etc).
* "Learn How Businesses Really Work". Don't get bored on the business meetings. Understand why they happen and what is happening. Understand how is your company working and is profitable. Context is very important. What is a bottom line, and how do you contribute to it? Read an MBA book.
* "Find a Mentor". It's OK to depend on someone, but find the right person. Be an apprentice. Mentor helps navigate infinite space of possible things to learn and provide useful feedback. It's also useful to know someone experiences. Self mentor, learn from people in the field you admire. Analyze their qualities, compare against yours, you got a list of things to do better.
* "Be a Mentor". You understand things well only if you can explain them. Great way to learn is to teach. Also a social benefit of knowing people may come in useful. Also in non-traditional forms like mailing list, IRC, etc.
* "Practice, Practice, Practice". Practice is where you are out of comfort zone. Good practice is when it feels awkward and difficult. Your code has to come out ugly. You should improve over time, then practice on the further awkward zone. Open source is great place to practice, community feedback will be valuable. Give yourself constraints, don't use X, or do it in Y time, etc. Make it feel challenging. Practice reading and writing (physically), understand threads, regexps, streams, other basic stuff, often not well understood stuff. Use online programming challenges (hackerrank? project euler?).
* "The Way That You Do It". Learn methodologies and software processes. Help improve your company's. Put together a plan, get buy-ins from others. If can't change the process, understand and make the best out of the imposed process.
* "On the Shoulders of Giants". Read great code! Learn from it! Compare it with your code. Keep adding tools and tricks to your bag, notice habits. Also helps you discover what is already out there, so you don't need to reinvent. There is much to be learn from people who came before us. Read projects like books, make notes. Write critique, publish it. Find a book club for code.
* "Automate Yourself into a Job". Build habit of noticing repetitive tasks. Make automations. Code generators and other things. Don't worry about things other then just saving time. Learn about Model Driven Architecture.

Part 3: "Executing"

* "Right Now". What can you do right now? Don't get comfortable. Self of urgency is increases productivity. Recognize the unproductive periods and improve. Turn long many month projects into short week projects. Release right now, things will come up that wouldn't come up otherwise.
* "Mind reader". Do things you assume others will need or are bothered by or express would want be "magically" done. It's a gamble. Do only small things, avoid things that lock in decisions/architectures. Do it to help and impress. Track hit rate with your guesses.
* "Daily Hit". Report at least one accomplishment every day. Make sure your manager knows. Track daily hits, set goals daily, weekly or longer. Think of business value. Done well becomes a habit - no tracking needed. What are annoying things for the team and no one fixes it? What can be automated? Try to do one per day. Win peoples hearts.
* "Remember Who You Work For". Understand company goals and metrics. Make change, change yourself, your team, your department and your company to help achieve the goals. Solve problems for your managers. That's your job, you do the work. He will take credit, but he also praises you. Ask your manager how can you make a difference. Then evaluate with him next time.
* "Be Where You're At". Accept your current role. Be ambitious but don't rub in the face of everyone. Don't cherry-pick work, and don't do sloppy job at the grunt work. The feeling of not being at position you deserve will never end, the cycle repeats. Keep focused on the present, it will get you further. You will feel happier and it will show. Talk about work goals avoid career subjects, office politics and gossip.
* "How Good a Job Can I Do Today?". Make more fun jobs you chose not to give full effort. Try to give your full effort all the time. Add challenge to the boring stuff. Maybe a scoreboard for unit test coverage for friendly competition with coworkers for bragging rights or prizes?
* "How Much Are You Worth?". Your employer pays for you twice your salary. Make yourself worth the investment. How much is that per day? Were you worth it today?
* "A Pebble in a Bucket of Water". Humility is important. Company will go on without you. Make yourself as replaceable as possible, it will make better environment, also easier to move on for you if necessary. Be aware of parts of code where team depends on you, and make sure they don't. Write documentation, refactor, explain.
* "Learn to Love Maintenance". Maintenance can be creative and unrestricted. There is not as much expectations as with greenfield projects. How much faster, more elegant and simpler can this part of the code be? Adding well placed bells and whistles where unexpected will win minds and hearts. Interacting with customer, enables you to truly learn how your business works. Greenfield projects are maintenance as soon as first line of code is written. Build ways to measure, pick important metrics and improve the product.
* "Eight-Hour Buron". Work so relentlessly after 8 hours you couldn't continue. Make your time as efficient as possible. Be very mindful of your time during work, manage it like a resource. When we have more of a resource we are more careless about it. Work less, accomplish more. Make sure you rest well.
* "Learn How to Fail". Humans make mistakes. Don't gag errors, use asserts during development. Errors are information. Too much defensive programming makes you blind. But it's also important to handle unforeseen errors. Everybody makes mistakes, so people don't judge each other by mistakes too much but rather by how we deal with those mistakes. Raise issues early, sooner found sooner gone. Take the blame, don't discuss blame, just get it fix asap. Offer solution or plan to find solution. Talk about concrete things, and time frames. Ask for help, it's all just about the problem being fixed. Stressful times are the best times to build loyalty. Well handled mistakes are better then no mistakes.
* "Say No". When manager asks if something can be done, it's probably for the reason. Ask for the concrete reason, maybe someone asked him. It's often not arbitrary. People who say yes all the time are geniuses or are laying. If you can't say "yes", say "I don't know, I need time to check" or "I don't know but will do my best". Insecure people don't say "I don't know". Record your commitments and results.
* "Don't Panic". None of the disasters/emergencies had noticeable impact on your career. Panicking is decreasing your performance and decision making. Good mechanism for survival, not good for software development. Keep panic journal, helps you recognize the situations after and improve at recognizing the situations as they happen.
* "Say It, Do It, Show It". Commit to your plan. Plans can be short. Find things to do and prioritize, be realistic. Do daily plans. Mark tasks done, it's a nice feeling. By rhythmic. Then make bigger plans, week, month... Communicate your plans to your management, they love it. Keep it transparent or people will stop trusting your plans. Solid plan can convince people.

Part 4: "Marketing... Not Just for Suits"

* "Perceptions, Perschmeptions". You should care what other people think of you. If you do great job and no one sees then no one cares. Performance appraisal is always subjective, there is no objective way to review performance. You will be measured on someone's perception. Different groups will care about different things. Manager your communication skills, colleagues your technical skills.
* "Adventure Tour Guide". Customers and manager are forced to relay on you, they are afraid of you and look for people who will make them comfortable. They are probably just as smart as you or smarter but know different things. Reverse the perspective, be a guest in their world. They are an expert helping you get your job done. Customer, sales, managers will be your advocates about promotions and firing. Are you grumpy? Are they afraid of you or telling you? Find situations where you are the non-expert. How would you like the expert to treat you?
* "Me Rite Reel Nice". Communicate well. Expand your vocabulary. Communicate ideas elegantly and precisely in a simple way so they are easy to understand. If you can't explain it easy in English, you cannot explain it easy in code. Keep a diary, practice writing and explaining. Learn touch-typing.
* "Be Present".  "Out of sight, out of mind". Do no be out of mind. Face-to-face communication creates tighter personal bonds. Important decisions are made over coffee or side conversations. Most people like interacting with other people in person. Learn about your colleagues, be personal. Ask sometimes "how are you today?" or "what do you do on weekends generally?", try to learn about the people. They will be more understanding of your mistakes. Reach out to people you don't have enough contact with regularly (make a reminder).
* "Suit Speak". Talk to business people in terms of business language, not computer language. How does your accomplishment relate to the business? How does it benefit the company?
* "Change the World". You need to have a mission to visibly change your team and company. Change can be small like more unit tests, not methodology or technology. You need to be driven to do your mission intrinsically. Some people will get angry, that's OK as long as your intentions are right. Don't be a jerk but also don't be sorry. Find your personal crusade. Don't be a zealot.
* "Let Your Voice Be Heard". Write a book, publish articles, present on conferences. Cool by association. Network. Don't limit yourself to the company you are working for. Participate in communities offline and online. You do have something to teach, and you will never feel 100% ready.
* "Build Your Brand". Your name is your brand. Don't water down what you stand for, be careful where you let your name show up. Don't send lousy messages or emails to many people. Don't be a jerk. Protect your brand from yourself.
* "Release Your code". Ask if you can open source parts of the code. Contribute to famous one source projects. It's a demonstrable skill. You can for example find what part of open source project is not well covered in unit tests. Refactor it to be easily coverable and cover it in tests.
* "Remarkability". Doesn't necessarily means "good", but does mean "worthy of attention". Not the cow with the best milk, the purple cow. Just stand out. Master a subject and write a book on it. Write code generator that reduces a week long task in to 5 minutes. Do something big and unthinkable on your next project. Be the purple cow who gives the best milk. Notice what other people "remark".
* "Making the Hang". Don't be afraid to hang around the pros. All it takes to make a connection is a little less humility. "Be the worst" one in the group. Don't be afraid to reach out to real pros. Also local ones. Go out of your way to make a conversations, especially if it makes you uncomfortable.

Part 5: "Maintaining Your Edge"

* "Already Obsolete". Technology moves really fast (most times). Start thinking ahead. It's gamble but you will lose if you don't play anyway. Keep your hand on the pulse of bleeding edge tech. Try it out. Make reminders.
* "You've Already Lost Your Job". Things are changing, economy is shifting, business is moving on. Don't limit yourself to your job description. Do not identify as your job. Try different jobs like tester or manager or other.
* "Path with No Destination". After each goal is next. The work is the goal. Focusing on the end makes you forget to improve the process. Bad process makes bad products, bad products make bad process. Try to enjoy washing the dishes.
* "Make Yourself a Map". Make product features as markers to know you are moving forward. Features need to be cohesive. You are your own product, be cohesive. It's OK to diversify but it's good to have a story that keeps it all together and makes sense. Make a map list things you did, learn from them then make plans for the future.
* "Watch the Market". Knowledge investment is like market investment, a gamble. If you stay comfortable with current skill sets you may miss next big thing. Watch "alpha geeks", often what they are into becomes the big thing tomorrow. Try becoming "alpha geek" or at least "make hang" with one.
* "That Fat Man in the Mirror". The author is fat (the author of the book too). Do 360 reviews of yourself, take note of the blind spots. Ask for feedback and self evaluate regularly. Make reminders. Don't ignore HR reviews as nonsense, use them. Ask trustworthy people for feedback. List characteristics you think are important, make a questionnaire from it. Ask people to answer it. Keep a journal. Read old entries. How much have you changed?
* "The South Indian Monkey Trap". Learn to let go. Rigid values make you fragile. Don't be a zealot about technologies, they come and go. Different technologies are best for different things. They may become obsolete over time unnoticed. Review your rigid believes and values. Explore things you hate (like technologies, do a project with it).
* "Avoid Waterfall Career Planning". Do agile career planning instead. If you do waterfall you might realize you are getting career you wanted but no longer want. Course correct and change career if necessary.
* "Better Than Yesterday". Overwhelming complexity is demotivating and can make it hard to see progress. Don't compare outcome, compare relative input instead. Make small improvements incrementally. Start small, the important thing is to keep doing it tomorrow. Make a list of things you want to improve. What can you do today about each item? Look at that list tomorrow. What can you do better this time? Do it again and again.
* "Go Independent". The biggest challenge is to do it all yourself and not hide behind the comfortable chairs in a corporate office. In corporations responsibility is shared so much you can get by without doing much or being motivated. If you strive to be remarkable, big company is a difficult place to get the best out of yourself. Going independent will require you to give your best in all areas.
