### Mon  9 Nov 16:54:23 CET 2020

I found yet another Mike Acton's talk, this time about Technical Direction. It's another great piece of advice how to be a good engineer. 

Here is the full talk [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WQlf9UIzF14](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WQlf9UIzF14)

* Technical Direction management breaks down to 5 elements: cost, commitment, conflict and cooperation. We'll get context for each one of the five elements, specifically example, risk profile, hard for Mike, training.

Examples

* Confidence: schedules are a tool to build confidence. Don't focus on managing a schedule, focus on the confidence. Where are you confident and not confident, and how can you change it.
* Confidence: 80/50 rule, when you spent 50% resources and are not 80% done you are far behind.
* Cost: you can't estimate cost of solving problems you haven't solved before, but it's not the cost that's the problem, it's the value. You should know how much development time is it worth solving first. If you don't know the worth, the cost is completely meaningless.
* Cost: It's important to have a cost profile for Development vs Research. It's 80/20 for Mike at the time of the talk. Research are problems with unknown value or cost, it's exploration. 
* Cost: Development are problems have an expected return. It's important to have a rule of thumb. For example 1 day of development should yield 5 days return.
* Cost: You always need to make decisions whether you should build or buy a solution so you should have a "function" to answer it. The "function" can be for example "can we create competitive advantage by knowing our context better then anyone else?".
* Commitment: There are always lots of variables, so it's not an excuse. You need to just give your best guess.
* Commitment: But you need to make internal calculation on where you can put down your risk. Work on increasing your confidence. 
* Commitment What would be the things you would be proud of to say you did in five years from now. 
* Commitment: Ramifications of choices aren't forever but last way longer then you think, it can hang around for 10 years on average.
* Conflict: ask yourself how to not be like Uber (? some famous conflicts in uber in 2015-2017?).
* Conflict: use processes to protect people from biases of the director. Example: lead developers can "outvote" the director.
* Conflict: the director should represent the company values.
* Conflict: if someone thinks there is a problem, there is a problem (at least a perception problem). Do not dismiss when people feel there is a problem.
* Conflict: technical director needs to know what accountability means. Be prepared to accept the cost to fix mistakes that affect others.
* Conflict: "conflict cockroaches" are hard to kill conflicts. Interpersonal fights or passive aggressive communication has to be stopped as soon as possible or it will only will get worse and will last even longer.
* Cooperation: Surprise is bad. Things should be obvious, clear, and as boring as possible.
* Cooperation: 80% of a project is "selling it", actual work is only 20%. Know what people say they want. Paint the picture for the future you're selling.
* Cooperation: Quarterly road map. Every feature needs user-size champion.

Risk profile

* Confidence: If you have too much confidence you are not doing anything interesting because you've done it before. Too little confidence is not getting anything done. Find the balance with R&D profile. Move over confident people around to other areas. Gives them interesting thing to do and opens op a spot for someone else to do the first thing. Find things that we are always confident about and let's get them off the table.
* Cost: spending too much is losing money, spending not enough is losing opportunity. To balance cost: triage, measure ux, ruthless editing (deciding on what to do or not to do). 
* Cost: is it worth to solve this problem. Prioritize. It's hard to say "no" and hear the "no".
* Commitment: if you over-commit you will burn out, you will be long-term failure if not successful. If you under-commit nobody knows what you work on and can't work with you or will assume you will do everything they want. To balance apply constant steady pressure.
* Commitment: teams drive commitments, they need to decide for themselves. But director should review and veto.
* Commitment: director should always provide problem and value to solve, never solution.
* Conflict: too much conflict is a toxic environment, not enough conflict means no creative energy because no critical review. To balance: survey the team as often as possible. Make sure the team is comfortable with reviewing inside the team. Unfiltered feedback firehouse, everyone can see it. 
* Cooperation: too much cooperation and you have a committee, not enough you have pieces that don't fit. To balance everyone practice leadership, everyone needs to be leading something. Work backwards from production schedule (yours and others).

Hard for Mike

* Confidence: scale of communication. He wants everyone to be confident about what his team is doing but each person has to be talked to differently to get them confidence. He ensures that his leads need to know the messaging (delegation).
* Confidence: if asked to talk about design, people say they don't have time, but when you say you are going to do react immediately. If you make commitments loud and early people are willing to talk about them.
* Confidence: Ensure as much 1:1 as much as possible for the team but also for in other teams.
* Cost: Subjective measure of value. How much is a millisecond worth specifically. How much is one person slightly less frustrated (by ux) worth?
* Cost: to solve, send surveys. Try to turn subjective measure into objective measure. 
* Cost: Budget time for low hanging fruit and optimization
* Commitment: Autonomy vs Management. Some people may self-burnout or over-commit. Get people to take time off. No heroism (no surprises). Language is important you are not request vacation, it was already yours; you did not do heroic job, you were forced to do it (because something went wrong). Implied promises and letting people know they might just implied somewhere.
* Conflict: Mike's instinct is to "suck it up" but it's wrong. To solve for that, spend time to build trust. Don't say anything and check if the person is looking for advice first. Remember perception problems are real problems.
* Cooperation: Timing. The next thing is always important thing ever (and it should be), but there is a limit. Stay out of the way of the next thing people are working on (demo, etc). Build reference targets, what it should look like. Have dedicated sources for immediate issues.

Training

* Confidence: people need to know how to pitch. Pitch should paint the picture, include cost, value,opportunities to learn and a plan to transition (migration) to that change. 
* Cost: cost/value metrics. People should be able to point out: development cost, maintenance cost, cost of entry, efficiency return (if applicable), user value (if applicable), learning value.
* Commitment: MVP, be clear and complete on what you are providing. "You will be able to do XXX" promise. Separate would-be-nice and guarantees.
* Commitment: Articulate clearly but in user value. State concrete changes. State problem and part of the problem solved. Clear expectations (to make sure people are not not assume).
* Conflict: Set expectations in terms of company values. It's not about changing their personality, but it's about being effective (communicate effective), and "what's right". The director's values are the values that are important to the team. Corporate neutrality is over.
* Conflict: to set clear values: be able to say what you believe, feedback on how people met values during reviews and 1:1. Whenever there is conflict know who will take action after the conflict.
* Cooperation: Convincing people to be champions of a solution. Find someone who will let you know if you managed to deliver thing you were championing.
* Cooperation: championing should include: articulate how the change will affect the company or product, why the change is important to you personally and you need to know how to gather support. 
