### Wed 25 Nov 12:44:33 CET 2020

Making another notes from a YouTube video. This time it's Crash Course playlist on Study Skills [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E7CwqNHn_Ns](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E7CwqNHn_Ns).

Taking Notes:

* When learning you take in new concepts, you should store them somewhere so you can refer to them later and you need to put it in your own words.
* Notes taken on computer make it easier to write more words then on paper thus making you think less on the subject (more on the syntax) and remember less. You can pay more attention to subject and less to syntax of notes on computer to if you try.
* Come prepared, good notebook and pen or app. Also make sure you are not distracted.
* Pay attention to: big ideas, summaries, overviews, conclusions, bullet points, definitions, examples (examples are super important).
* The outline method: tree structure of bullet lists. Conveys structure but some information may look uniform, use formatting to make some bullet points stand out.
* The Cornell method: three sections, cues, notes, summary. Cues: real time notes. Cues: questions, things to review. Summary: write few sentences few minutes after the session.
* Mind mapping method: tree diagrams representing relationships between concepts visually.

Reading:

* Prioritize decide what to read, skim or skip.
* Distinguish between mandatory and supplemental texts. 
* Reading text hierarchy: 1) arguments, 2) descriptions, 3) context.
* Skilled reader 200-400 words per minute, beyond that it's skimming with lower comprehension.
* Speed reading techniques are scientifically proven to not work.
* Eliminating saccades (eye movement when reading) like in RSVP (flashing words in one spot) doesn't let you read again things you didn't understand and taxes your working memory
* Eliminating sub vocalization (reading voice in your mind) is decreasing comprehension especially on more difficult texts.
* Just practice reading.
* Stay focused.
* Pseudo skimming technique, when you notice important things slow down and read entire paragraph. Look out for keywords, first and last paragraph, formatted text.
* There are two ways of remembering: recalling and recognizing. Highlighting has danger of confusing recognition (simply remembering thing exist) and recalling (actually remember what the thing is exactly). The more highlighting the bigger danger.
* Draw dot big or important sentences on the margin, draw dash on examples or explanations about the last big idea.
* Active Reading SQ3R - Survey, Question, Read, Recite and Review.
* Survey: pre-read read, skim over beginning, headings, end questions. Primes your brain helps you pay attention to important things when reading later.
* Question: write out questions that come to mind after survey - further primes your brain to pay attention to important things
* Reading: just reading
* Recite: take notes (fact heavy texts) and/or summarize (big idea texts) what you read
* Review: (more info later)

Memorizing:

* Memory is web of associated bits of information.
* Working memory is gained via repetition and holds about 15-30s and can hold only 4-7 things at a time. 
* Explicit process when studying, transferring info from working memory to long term memory
* Implicit process involuntarily transferring info from working memory to long term memory
* Kinds of long term memory: procedural - how to do things, episodic - specific life episodes, and others.
* Things that help memorizing: mnemonics, chunking.
* Shallow processing encodes memory based on sensory level for example remember name based on the font
* Deep processing encodes semantically (meaningfully) for example remember name based on what it means in different language
* Connect memory to meaningful and personal emotions for most effective remembering
* Retrieval cues memories which can be associated to the memory we try to recall
* Priming (context depended memory) is activating associations non-consciously.
* State depended memory, internal state rather then external environment. 
* The order of receiving information is another way of priming. Things first and last are remembered better (serial position effect).
* Early words are remembered through primacy effect because they are rehearsed more.
* Last words are remembered through recent effect.
* Three ways to forget: failing to encode, failing to retrieve and storage decay.
* Memory is reconstruction and reproduction. Every time recall memory it changes a little.
* Take brakes to allow new neural connections to solidify.
* Brain remembers better, physical visuals and uncommon, than common and abstract.
* Memories have storage and retrieval strength. Memories don't fade away but ability to retrieve them does.
* The harder you work to recall the better you will remember next time - the spacing effect. So the most efficient time to recall is just before you forget.
* The leitner system. 5 boxes: 1 day, 3 days, week, 2 weeks, 2 months. (maybe other spaces?) Whenever you recall piece of information from the box move it to the next box. When you don't move it to first box.
* Don't passively reread, actively try to recall from memory. Put most effort in actually practicing using the information.

Planning:

* 2 modes. Planning and robot modes. Plan tasks than execute.
* Organizational system. Input: Tasks, events and ideas. Output: Notes, other output. Use task manager (todo list/trello), calendar, note taking system, storage for notes. 
* Create a system for organization. Organize information into a tree (of folders). 
* Make effort to use your system without fail all the time to not compromise it's structure and relay on it. Remove friction from the process to ensure you actually do use it all the time. Put things in the right places and do the right places right away.
* Planning should be weekly and daily. Also adhoc plans for specific longer goals.
* Batch similar tasks to avoid fragmentation.
* You should also review your last plan.
* Be regular, thorough and diligent to avoid entropy (everything tends to chaos).

Concentration:

* Will power is a limited resource. Remove distractions to preserve it.
* Two types of attention: voluntary when you wan to do something, stimulus when something grabs your attention.
* Voluntary attention uses mechanisms to block competing stimuli but it can't be done forever leading to directed attention fatigue.
* Stop multi-tasking, cognitive switching penalty (time and effort wasted). Minimum 20-30 minutes before switching.
* Attention residue is the old task hanging around when the focus was already switched to new task
* Make sure your environment is best for focus. Establish work place to associate it in your brain with working context. Avoid things around work place which are suggesting something else than work.
* Break tasks to different phases: brainstorming, researching, drafting, editing. Remove things unnecessary in each phase, for example internet is needed only during research phase.
* Mitigate future distractions: phone on silent etc.
* Whenever you give in to craving for novelty you are building a habit. Whenever you acknowledge a craving and actively ignore it you build a habit of ignoring the craving.
* Plan short breaks every 25-30 minutes or so, during breaks don't participate in other tasks to avoid context residue.
* Brain is a physical, biological organ. It has needs. Sleep, eating and exercise!

Procrastination:

* Temporal Motivation Theory. motivation = (expectancy * value) / (impulsiveness * delay). 
* Expectancy is how much I expect I'll finish the task. Value is what is the reward for completing the task and experience of performing the task. Impulsiveness is how easily you get distracted. Delay is when you will receive the reward for completing the task
* Delay is also the hardest factor to control.
* Improve expectancy, slice the task into smaller tasks, define action plan of things to do. Ask for help.
* Improve the value. 1) Improve actual reward for completing the task. 2) Improve the experience of work. 3) Add additional reward or rewards for sub tasks.
* Low density fun vs high density fun. Allow yourself for high density fun to create anticipation (improving the value and giving ammunition to fight with impulsiveness).
* Impulsiveness. Your environment matters, dedicated study spot with no distractions.
* Brain runs on work/rest cycles, you can do only so much during the day.
* Don't start with easy work because it's going to be easy to convince yourself you've done enough for the day.
* "Eat the frog", do the most difficult thing first. "If it's your job to eat a frog, it's the best to do it first thing in the morning. And if it's your job to eat two frogs, eat the biggest one first".
* Pomodoro technique. Hard as you can on one task for 25 minutes. When you get impulse do something else write it down and get back to work. After timer finishes take 5 minutes break and repeat the process. The method works well because it re frames the task as input based rather than output based. Actually using a timer is required!

Studying for tests:

* Make study schedule. Brain is hardwired to care about now rather than later. Best write in the calendar.
* Replicate test conditions. Get as much information about the test as possible: time, questions, environment, tools. Replicate the test as much as possible, literally perform the replicas of test.
* Create questions out of notes. Facts on flash cards. Equations, problems spend most time working through the problems.
* How to ask for help. First ask: what exactly I don't understand? Don't just give up with "I don't get this". Spent 15 more minutes solving the problem yourself. Work line by line, find exactly where confusion starts. Write down solutions you found so far, documents and makes context for helper. Use rubber duck debugging method.
* To solidify knowledge write a cheat card even if you can't use it.
* Remember to break, otherwise your brain cannot work efficiently. Both short and long breaks.

Test Anxiety:

* Fear doesn't go away. It's normal and some can be a good thing because it shows you care.
* Too much stress affects negatively memory.
* Three fears: repeating past failures, unknown, stakes.
* When feeling stress sit down and spend few minutes writing down exactly what is causing the stress. It will reduce the stress because the causes are stored safe meantime your brain has more space to focus on important things.
* Fear repeating past failures. Negativity bias (assuming negative will happen more then positive). You are not defined by past successes or failures. You can chose differently at any time. Review your past tests and notice patterns, also ask for feedback. Analyze past tests in detail and understand exactly where and why did you make mistakes and cross reference it with your notes and highlight relevant part. Understand why exactly you failed, analyze the process that led you to make that mistake. Make plan on how exactly you will make better next time.
* Fear of the unknown. Gain as much experience and information over the test as possible, replicate the test as much as possible including time constraints, types of questions, environments etc.
* Fear of stakes. Actually in reality stakes are never that high, you always can recover. Re frame the test in your mind: it's not a judgment, it's a learning opportunity or experiment. Also don't hesitate for help if you don't handle the stress well.

Papers:

* Start with pre writting only then do the research.
* It will make you recall memories you didn't know you had, and it will make you bring up some arguments and questions.
* It will make your researched more focused.
* With big projects you need to first jump in and make mess first. (iteration!)
* pre writting do a brain-dump, do pomodoro for 25 minutes and just start writing. Identify all facts, questions, topics and resources you know may be worth researching.
* Research process. Don't get stuck forever. Find your sources first. Wikipedia citation section is a great starter. Google Scholar, journal databases like EBSCO and notes and bibliography sections of most popular science books. Note all materials down so you don't have to look for them again. Skim through all materials, mark sections relevant to your research and add notes over details for arguments. Then ask yourself if you are done. You need at least 2 main sources for your thesis and at least one source for each secondary argument. Repeat the process, then start writing the draft.
* First draft should be awful. First draft is about creativity not perfection. You should expect your first draft to be bad! (iteration!) Tip: use different environment or tools to make you feel like it's really OK to make a mess.
* Editing. Do it in two stages. Content stage is about reviewing if content is communicating the points the most effective and clear way possible. Review content as a whole and ask important questions: "does each argument support the thesis?", "does the paper have good narrative flow?", "is each argument properly flashed out and backed up with research or external sources?", "what can be removed or written in a clearer, simpler way?". Stage two: technical edit is about structure, syntax. Things like: spelling and grammar mistakes, poorly structured sentences, formatting errors, sentences that don't sound right. Use final form of the document to review in this stage. Don't correct as you go, mark down first then apply all corrections because it costs context switching. 
* Also read it out loud and ask other people to give you feedback. Remember that each person can read your paper the first time only once, be strategic with your reviewers. Explicitly ask for what kind of feedback you want.
* After everything is done, print and read the final document. 

Exercise:
* You sit down and stare at screens all the time, that's slowing down your brain.
* Brain evolved with movement, if you don't move you don't need brain, like plants. Thinking is evolutionary internalization of movement. Use it or lose it.
* Not moving greatly increases risk of dementia.
* Everything in your body evolved to do what it does, and when it doesn't do it it becomes a resource waste. You need to do things to keep your body working. 
* Getting your heart beat elevated regularly makes you a better learner. It optimizes levels of neurotransmitters (greasing the thought pathways). Stimulates generating new neurons and neuron binding (making new pathways). 
* How to exercise? Don't exercise and study at the same time. Exercise immediately before learning. Elevated heart rate with complex skill based movement (skating, basketball, martial arts, yoga) or first heart rate then skill based like (run then climb). Start small, focus on building the habit. 
