### Fri 29 Jan 18:24:18 CET 2021

So today's event really does scream for a post. And I've been looking for a reason recently to write up another post on my blog.

Today at my company we had one of those "team-building" events. I really hate those things, especially after I have quit alcohol. There is virtually no way to bond with people on those things. They are awkward, forced, fake and generally an unpleasant waste of time at best. Not this one though, this one was different.

Because of the current situation with the pandemic it was of course held online, via zoom conference meeting. At first we were told this is going to be an room escape game, just online. When we joined the meeting we finally learned that this game was different, it was a jury investigation and judgment game. Our job was to find a character in game (played by an actor) guilty or not guilty (or how guilty: first degree murder, second degree murder, unintentional manslaughter).

There were three rounds and our team was split to smaller teams randomly for each round. At the beginning of each round we were presented with few pieces of evidence which we were supposed to review. Rounds were very short, about 10 minutes, just barely enough time to get familiar with the evidence and try to discuss and prepare some questions. After each round we all came together and could interview the character charged of murder. There was time pressure and missing information.

I'll skip the details of the investigation part because that is not what was interesting about the game. Eventually we found out the piece of evidence and the right line of questioning and the charged character admitted to committing the murder. It was clear that she has assisted suicide a person who wanted to die in a country where euthanasia wasn't legal. So all of the game until this point was really just a setup to ask a moral question. Do you find the person guilty who assisted suicide when it's illegal in your country. Or if you cut to the chase, do you follow the law no matter what. How do you handle discussing such problem and arrive at unanimous vote. When an interesting ethical dilemma.

It doesn't matter what the outcome of the game was. The real outcome of the game was that it held a mirror for use showing what kind of fabric are we made of as human beings and as a team.

Some team members decided to follow the law literally and unquestionably. Some (managers) team members were really shook by the dilemma and poorly handled being stubborn at their opinion. Most people were not emotionally developed to handle this stressful situation well. It really surprised me. I learned that I am giving to people around me more credit then I should. Those were serious, intelligent, well functioning adults, yet I haven't seen very many traces of serious thought on their faces. It was as if they never considered such issues before. I was truly surprised.

And I realized, that is it! That is it right there. That's why I can't connect with most people. We are just on a different emotional level. Comparing to those people I have been in emotional hell and came back. No wander I cannot realize that some people may not know what I mean. I give them credit and respect and assume they know and are developed in those areas as much as I am but that is not the case! They are clueless, to most those people worst thing that happened was that their dog died, if that. Even people in high positions. Sociopathological managers cluelessly trying to telegraph their supposed empathy. Senior coworkers cluelessly following the rules without any consideration. Most not capable of awaking any kind of feeling for the situation in themselves or telling the fiction from the reality. They do not have emotional capacity and experience to handle anything more then an argument with their close ones, and probably that is not handled well either. I think I need to start treating adults around me as immature teenagers and patiently explain things to them or avoid it all together.

I am truly alone. I keep telling myself that I should relay on my intuition more and each time I find that I still wasn't relaying on it enough. I wish I could find a person with whom I could deeply connect on the emotional level, who would actually have deep understanding. I know this is very unlikely. 

I know I am tooting my own horn here, but a bit of indulgence is not a bad thing. And it provides a convenient explanation for why, oh why, it so damn hard to connect with people. If you are reading this, which I supposed you shouldn't because I am not sharing this blog anywhere, give yourself more credit. Try to be fair with people, but know that sometimes you might be overcompensating and they may not deserve your credit.

Also it's possible that it's just the corporate environment that breeds this kind of people. I am now deeply convinced I do not belong in that environment. Well I was convinced of that before, but my certainty only deepens.
