### Tue 16 Mar 21:37:24 CET 2021
Dear diary. Things are going well. I am making slow, but progress with my algorithmic practice. I've been practicing on [leetcode](https://leetcode.com). I've recently learned Dynamic Programming. It's very neat programming technique, that can yield robust results on a wide array of problems. I still need to practice it and other competitive programming techniques more, but I am happy with the result already. I have to say I'm quite excited for the prospect of starting my own business. I tend to think about myself as a highly creative and intuitive person. Not the analytical type. I think my right brain is driving most of my decisions or at least much more than many other programmers. I've recently heard that entrepreneurs are usually people like exactly me. But I also have heavily exercised left brain, due to the line of work. I think something about being naturally right-brain led but practicing for decades your left brain daily makes for a powerful combination. My extreme due diligence, while maintaining high focus on the customer value and consistent outside-of-the-box thinking leads me to a very interesting cross-point in speed and quality I think most other developers rarely want to or even can perform at. I think most other developers I worked with either lacked the quality or the speed, or both. Not to mention creative problem solving and focusing on the actual root issue. Programmers very often want to solve everything by programming, but sometimes that's not the fastest or not even the correct solution. I don't think I'm the fastest or the highest quality, but I do think that my sum total of both speed and quality is one of the highest on the market. It's going to be still many months before I even make my first attempt but I'm really excited to try.

