#### Paying And Incuring Debts - Tue Jan 14 19:44:18 CET 2020

My hackathon project turned out to be a grand success and turned out exactly the way I anticipated. Actually no, it surprised me how fast things have started moving and how far the cascading effects reached into areas I did not at all had foreseen in the most wonderful way. I believe my work has brought joy and promise of better future to many people, including myself. Currently I'm again resting from deeper dives into technology. I'll need to pay my debt and follow up on that hackathon migration success with similar successes for many other features in our monolith application. I've been whining all year about what I wanted. Now I got it and it's time to shut up and pay back the favour.

I'm using the downtime to decompress, refocus more on my personal mental and physical wellness. "Health" would have sounded wrong here since I do consider myself quite healthy at the moment, certainly not any less healthy then an average person of my circumstances. I focused on eating less and better things, I'm shyly trying my way back to some exercising and spending more time reading Nassim Taleb and Nietzsche. I also rediscovered the amazing joy of doing something selfless. Indeed Taleb is right about the Skin In The Game. But having skin in the game for a selfless cause feels almost ubermensch-ish... It definitely let me straighten up my back, rise my head and feel like I have right to be on this planet. But again it's critical I follow this promise of selflessness through and pay the debts. Not because how others see me. Because how I see myself.

PS. I noticed my posts are getting longer and less frequent. That was not the initial intention for this blog. I wanted to keep it more as a research log. I'll observe how it evolves for a while and then decide what to do about it.
