#### Sun Feb  2 11:15:42 CET 2020
A quick update. I'm currently ill with the seasonal virus and flu and have a bit more time. I've made small updates to my blog engine (fixed entry length to from 15 lines to infinite and improved handling of `_emphasis_` text). Since few days I'm working on a longer post about infinite game worlds and space partitioning, it should be out next week. Meantime something else I feel I need to share.

Yesterday I've discovered a fascinating and profound talk by Alan Kay https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=j9ZGFaIHegE. (Here is the pre-read https://internetat50.com/references/Kay_How.pdf.) Alan Kay has been working in ARPA and Xerox research facilities and had a lot to do with invention of only such small technologies as personal computers, graphical user interfaces, object oriented programing and the internet. If Alan Turing is the Newton of Computer Science, Alan Kay is the Einstein (he also looks like one in the video). It's amazing how profound that talk is. Every single minute hits home and has deep meaning. It almost feel like everything I've been studying over the last year has been in preparation to receive this talk. Whenever I feel I learn something profound and deeply meaningful I feel pleasurable feeling of excitement, a wave of tingling passes through my body. This was definitely one of those times. It could be the confirmation bias, but it felt great to know that my instinctive curiosity is leading me to the areas such great minds as Alan Kay are dwelling.
