// project: blog
// date: Wed Dec  4 00:52:29 CET 2019

# odrzutowiec/blog
Hello welcome to my blog.

#### Hello world - Wed Dec  4 00:49:05 CET 2019
This is the first entry. I made today significant progress with my blog tech.

* `make deploy` prepares a new `gh-pages` branch commit and pushes it to github
* `awk/lib.awk` will be a common place for all shared awk functions
* `make build` supports now parsing markdown meta variables (disabled until useful)
* `make test` runs `make build` and automatically opens the browser. Super convenient especially when running `:!make test` in vim.

I'm very happy with this but it's 1am and I really need to get some rest.

#### Wed Dec  4 23:49:47 CET 2019
No time for updates. That unfortunately means no serious progress in the blog tech. I only improved the `make deploy` so that it commit file delete changes. It had a bug where it would commit previous file again even if it was deleted in the new version.

### Mon Dec  9 19:49:35 CET 2019
I'm a little tired of `make` and `awk` at the moment so I decided to switch projects for a while. I have the template variables feature pretty much working except that for some reason when running `awk` via `make` it errors with `awk: invalid -v option` but that same exact command when run manually by pasting it in the terminal work sperfectly fine.

I've recently heard that the "health" niche is evergreen on mobile. For the last year on and off I've been working on week organiser algorithm I named GYST. I'll brush up on this project. Update all the dependencies and see if I can make some progress. Last time I stopped at having simple D3 visualisation for my genetic algorithm since I needed to understand better why doesn't my algorithm work.

#### Mon Dec  9 22:39:51 CET 2019
I've solve it! I have now variables working in blog tech. Apparently my problem was that xargs was treating everything as one big argument instead of few separate arguments separated -v. I think internally xargs is not calling shell but rather forks the program directly and passes arguments to it via the c interface. That would explain why the command that was generated by `xargs -t` was working correctly when manually copied and pasted into the terminal but would fail when run via xargs/make.
Anyway next problem to solve in blog tech is start dynamically replace variable names from .md files into their values that were passed as arugments to awk script.
